direct-georef-atbx

---

## Overview

This ArcGIS toolbox allows for raw images from an RTK DJI drone flight to be directly georeferenced. Python script generated by Claude and edited by the authors uses onboard GPS and IMU metadata to project each image to its geographic position. The workflow begins with inputting raw images and a takeoff offset, defined by the difference between the water surface level and drone takeoff point. Within the script, metadata extraction parses EXIF and XMP headers for GPS coordinates, relative altitude, and gimbal orientation, which are then projected into the Universal Transverse Mercator coordinate system. The script calculates the Ground Sampling Distance and rotates images based on gimbal yaw. Each processed image is saved with a corresponding world file (.pgw) that tells GIS software  where to place the image (location of the top-left corner, pixel size, and rotation factor). It also generates a projection (.prj) file, which defines the coordinate system for that specific image. Following georeferencing, the images can be imported into an ArcGIS Pro Mosaic Dataset. This tool was built around the DJI Mavic 3 Multispectral system.


   This repository contains:
   DroneTools.atbx: ArcGIS Pro toolbox
   DroneTools.py: script used for running toolbox 
   LICENSE: code released under the MIT license 
   README.md: comprehensive description of GitHub software project

## Getting Started
### Dependencies
- This script was developed and tested using ArcGIS Pro 3.5. Earlier or newer versions of ArcGIS Pro that support .atbx toolbox files may also work, but compatibility has not been tested.


### Executing Program
1. Separate raw jpg images into their own folder. If Elevation Optimization was selected, exclude ending oblique images from the folder. 
2. Launch ArcGIS Pro. In Catalog --> Toolboxes, upload the DroneTools.atbx tool.
3. Run the DirectGeoreferencing script.

   
     a. Select folder input, navigate to raw jpg folder.


    b. Set takeoff-above-water offset (default 0; positive if you launched from a dock or a bank above the lake).

### Post Processing

## Authors
- Liliana McClain (lilianamcclain@gmail.com)
- Isabella Zazzali (izzyszaz@gmail.com)
- Amanda Blunt (bluntamanda1@gmail.com)
- Wes Lauer (LauerJ@seattleu.edu)

## Acknowledgements

This projects scripts were built with the assistance of Claude, an AI assistant developed by Anthropic.

_Last updated: 2026-07-07_
